FILM: National Treasure
YEAR: 2004

PLOT:

Benjamin Franklin Gates is an American historian, cryptographer, and treasure hunter. When Ben was young, his grandfather John told him that, in 1832, Charles Carroll passed on a secret clue to their ancestor of a fabled treasure hidden in America from ancient times to the Knights Templar, Founding Fathers and Freemasons. Carroll's clue leads anyone to the treasure with the phrase "the secret lies with Charlotte". While Ben is convinced by the story, his skeptical father, Patrick, dismisses it as nonsense.

Ben and his friend, computer expert Riley Poole, head an expedition financed by wealthy Ian Howe to find the Charlotte, revealed to be a ship lost in the Arctic. Within the ship, they find a meerschaum pipe, whose engravings reveal the next clue is on the Declaration of Independence. When Ian reveals himself as a crime boss and suggests stealing the Declaration, a fight ensues, and the group splits. Ben and Riley report Ian's plan to the Federal Bureau of Investigation and Abigail Chase of the National Archives, but they don't believe them. Ben decides to protect the Declaration by removing it from the Archives' preservation room during a gala event before Ian does. Obtaining Abigail's fingerprints, he successfully obtains the Declaration, but he is spotted by Ian's group just as they break in to steal it. Ben tries to leave via the gift shop but has to pay for the Declaration when the cashier mistakes it for a souvenir copy. Suspecting something amiss, Abigail confronts Ben and takes back the document. Ian promptly kidnaps her, but Ben and Riley rescue Abigail, tricking Ian by leaving behind a souvenir copy of the Declaration. The FBI, led by Agent Sadusky, begins tracking Ben.

Going to Patrick's house, the trio studies the Declaration and discovers a book cipher written in invisible ink. The message refers to Benjamin Franklin's Silence Dogood letters. Patrick formerly owned them but donated them to the Franklin Institute. Paying a schoolboy to view the letters and decipher the code for them, Ben, Riley, and Abigail discover a message pointing to the bell tower of Independence Hall. Pursued by Ian, they find a brick containing a pair of spectacles with multiple colored lenses, which, when used to read the back of the Declaration, reveal a clue pointing to Trinity Church. Ian's associates chase the trio through Philadelphia until the FBI arrests Ben. Abigail and Riley lose the Declaration to Ian, but Abigail convinces Ian to help them rescue Ben in exchange for the next clue. Ian agrees, contacts the FBI, and arranges a meeting at the USS Intrepid, where they help Ben evade the FBI.

Ian returns the Declaration and asks for the next clue, but when Ben remains coy, Ian reveals he has taken Patrick hostage. They travel to the Trinity Church, where they find an underground passage that appears to lead to a dead end, lit by a lone lantern. Patrick claims it is a reference to the Midnight Ride of Paul Revere, pointing Ian to the Old North Church in Boston. Ian traps Ben, Abigail, Riley, and Patrick in the chamber and leaves for Boston after Patrick sends Ian on a wild goose chase with a false clue to get him out of the way. Ben then finds a notch the meerschaum pipe fits into, opening a large chamber containing the treasure, with a staircase to the surface. Ben meets up with Sadusky—who is actually a Freemason—at ground level to return the Declaration. In exchange for dropping the charges on him and Abigail, Ben wants to donate the treasure to museums worldwide, crediting the Gates family and Riley for the discovery and Ian's arrest in place of his own. On a tip from Ben, the FBI finds Ian in Boston, breaking into the Old North Church, and arrests him on the spot.

Later, Ben and Abigail start a relationship, and Riley is somewhat upset that Ben turned down the 10% finder's fee for the treasure. However, the 1% he "did" accept has still netted them all significant wealth.

CAST:

Nicolas Cage as Benjamin Franklin Gates:[3] An American treasure hunter and cryptographer.
Hunter Gomez as young Benjamin Gates
Sean Bean as Ian Howe: An entrepreneur, crime boss and treasure hunter who is a former friend of Benjamin Gates.[4]
Diane Kruger as Dr. Abigail Chase: An archivist at the National Archives who aids Benjamin Gates in treasure hunting.
Justin Bartha as Riley Poole: A sardonic computer expert and friend of Benjamin Gates.
Jon Voight as Patrick Henry Gates: A former treasure hunter and the father of Benjamin Gates.
Harvey Keitel as Agent Peter Sadusky: An FBI Special Agent in pursuit of the stolen Declaration of Independence.
Christopher Plummer as John Adams Gates: The father of Patrick Gates and the grandfather of Benjamin Gates.
Deborah Yates as Rebecca
David Dayan Fisher appears as Shaw, Stewart Finlay-McLennan as Powell, Oleg Taktarov as Viktor Shippen, and Stephen Pope as Phil McGregor (Ian's henchmen); Annie Parisse, Mark Pellegrino, Armando Riesco, and Erik King play agents Dawes, Ted Johnson, Hendricks, and Colfax, respectively. Don McManus appears as Dr. Stan Herbert, Arabella Field appears as Abigail's secretary, and Yves Michel-Beneche appears as the boy who gives Riley clues at the museum. Sharon Wilkins, Alexandra Balahoutis, and Dahn Ballard portray a butcher, a clothing store clerk, and a gift shop cashier respectively. Jason Earles portrays Thomas Gates, and Terrence Currier portrays a young version of Founding Father Charles Carroll.