FILM: Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny
YEAR: 2023

PLOT:

In 1944, Nazis capture Indiana Jones and Oxford archaeologist Basil Shaw as they attempt to retrieve the Lance of Longinus from a castle in the French Alps. Astrophysicist Jürgen Voller informs his superiors the Lance is fake, but he has found half of Archimedes' Dial, an Antikythera mechanism built by the ancient Syracusan mathematician Archimedes which reveals time fissures, thereby allowing for possible time travel. Indy escapes onto a Berlin-bound train filled with looted antiquities and frees Basil. He obtains the piece of the Dial, and the two escape the train just before Allied forces derail it.

In 1969, Indy is retiring from Hunter College in New York City. Marion has recently left him and filed for legal separation due to both parties' depression over their son Mutt being killed in the Vietnam War. Indy's goddaughter, archaeologist Helena Shaw, unexpectedly visits and wants to research the Dial. Indy warns that her late father, Basil, became obsessed with studying the Dial before relinquishing it to Indy to destroy, which he never did.

As Indy and Helena retrieve the Dial half from the college archives, Voller's accomplices attack them. The CIA assists Voller, now working for NASA as "Dr. Schmidt". Helena, revealed as an antiquities smuggler, absconds with the Dial to put it up for auction on the black market. Indy is framed for two colleagues' murders, forcing him to escape through the Apollo 11 moon landing parade, then an anti-war protest.

Indy seeks out his old friend Sallah, now a New York cab driver, who helps him flee the country after surmising that Helena will likely sell the Dial in Tangier. At a Tangier hotel, Indy disrupts Helena's illegal private auction, but Voller and his henchmen arrive and steal the artifact. Indy, Helena, and her teen sidekick Teddy Kumar chase them through the streets in a tuk-tuk. The CIA intercepts Voller after the U.S. government disavows him for going rogue, but his cohorts murder the agents and steal their helicopter.

Indy, Helena and Teddy trail Voller to Greece and team up with Indy's old friend Renaldo, a professional diver. Guided by Basil's research, they dive to an ancient Aegean Sea shipwreck and retrieve a "graphikos" tablet containing directions to the Dial's other half. Voller arrives and murders Renaldo and all of his crew. Indy's group escapes and heads to Sicily, pursued by Voller.

Inside the Ear of Dionysius cavern, Indy and Helena find Archimedes' tomb, the Dial's second half, and a 20th century wristwatch on Archimedes' skeletal arm. Voller appears and captures Indy, wounding him. Helena and Teddy escape and chase Voller. After reassembling the Dial, Voller reveals his plans to travel back to 1939 to assassinate Adolf Hitler and help lead Germany to victory in World War II without repeating Hitler's mistake. At an airfield, Voller activates the Dial and locates a time fissure in the sky. Indy is held captive on Voller's stolen plane while Helena stows away through its landing gear. Teddy follows them in another plane.

Whilst approaching the fissure, Indy realizes that continental drift could have altered the timeline coordinates. Rather than 1939, the group arrives at the Siege of Syracuse in 212 BC. The warring armies shoot down Voller's plane, believing it to be a dragon. Indy and Helena parachute out just before the plane crashes, killing everyone else aboard, while Teddy lands safely. Archimedes finds Voller's body and wristwatch in the wreckage. He gives Indy the Dial but keeps the watch. Indy and Helena learn that Archimedes created the Dial to bring users from the future through fissures that lead only to 212 BC. As the fissure begins to collapse, Indy wants to remain behind, feeling he has nothing left to return to. Helena, fearing a time paradox and unwilling to give up on him, knocks Indy unconscious.

Back in the present, a recovering Indy awakens in his apartment and reunites with Helena, Teddy, Sallah and Marion. Marion and Indy reconcile.

CAST:

Harrison Ford as Dr. Henry "Indiana" Jones, Jr., a world-renowned globe-trotting archaeologist and college professor.[10][11]
Anthony Ingruber as young Indiana Jones (1944). Ingruber had portrayed a younger version of Ford's character William Jones in The Age of Adaline (2015), serving as the on-set body double before Ford's de-aged likeness and voice was inserted over Ingruber's using CGI for brief parts of the 1944 scenes of Dial of Destiny. Ingruber also portrays a hotel guest attending Helena's auction.
Phoebe Waller-Bridge as Helena Shaw,[12] Indy's goddaughter.[10] The filmmakers described the character as "slippery, charming, the girl next door, a grifter," a "pioneer in ethical accounting" and similar to comedic characters with "machine-gun" dialogue akin to those of Ben Hecht's plays.[13] She is the daughter of Indy's old friend and colleague, Basil Shaw.[10] Holly Lawton portrays a young Helena.
Mads Mikkelsen as Dr. Jürgen Voller,[14] a sociopathic German scientist, astrophysicist[15] and former Nazi during World War II who has been hired by NASA under the name "Dr. Schmidt" to run the Apollo Moon landing program, while using CIA assets for his own gain.[16] Mikkelsen felt that Voller is a man who would like to "correct" some mistakes of the past with the film's MacGuffin to make the world "a much better place to live in," matching wits against Indy in a race to retrieve the artifact.[13]
Antonio Banderas as Renaldo,[17] an old friend of Indy who operates as an expert frogman.[18] Banderas claimed that his character is a rogue who is "a good guy who dies for Indiana Jones". He enjoyed working with Ford, Mangold and Steven Spielberg, who co-produced The Mask of Zorro (1998), one of his previous films.[19] Banderas also pointed out that his role as Renaldo veers more into a cameo appearance.[18]
John Rhys-Davies as Sallah, Indy's old friend who aided in finding the Ark of the Covenant in 1936 and the Holy Grail in 1938. Sallah and his family have since immigrated to New York City with Indy's assistance. He now works as a cab driver.
Toby Jones as Basil Shaw, an Oxford professor of archaeology, ally of Indy from his days in World War II, and Helena's father, who was obsessed with the Dial.[20]
Boyd Holbrook as Klaber, Voller's nefarious and trigger-happy right-hand man in 1969.[21] Holbrook described Klaber as Voller's lapdog, "and a very crazy one at that."[13]
Ethann Isidore as Teddy Kumar, Helena's young Moroccan sidekick in Tangier.[22]
Karen Allen as Marion Ravenwood, Indy's estranged wife, who aided in finding the Ark of the Covenant in 1936 and the Crystal Skull of Akator in 1957.[23]
Shaunette Renée Wilson as Agent Mason, a CIA agent assigned to work for Voller.
Thomas Kretschmann as Colonel Weber, a Nazi for whom Voller works in 1944.[14]
Olivier Richters as Hauke,[23] a henchman of Voller.[24][25] Richters takes on the role of a heavybuilt henchman that opposes Indiana, a role that was preceded by Pat Roach in the first two films, and Igor Jijikine in Kingdom of the Crystal Skull.
Mark Killeen as Pontimus, a soldier from 212 BC during the Siege of Syracuse.[25]
Nasser Memarzia as Archimedes, a brilliant scientist from 212 BC Syracuse and inventor of the Antikythera ("Dial of Destiny").
Martin McDougall as Durkin, a CIA agent working with Voller.
Alaa Safi as Aziz Rahim, the son of a Moroccan mobster, who was previously engaged to Helena Shaw.
Anna Francolini as Mandy, one of Indiana Jones' colleagues at Hunter College.
Photographs of Sean Connery and Shia LaBeouf are used to represent their respective Last Crusade and Kingdom of the Crystal Skull characters: Henry Jones Sr. and Mutt Williams (Henry Jones III).
